Scroll Timing API proposal - clarifications to some definitions (#1233)
MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers: PerformanceScrollTiming/explainer.md

| `name` | DOMString | Always `"scroll"` (inherited from PerformanceEntry) |
| `startTime` | DOMHighResTimeStamp | Timestamp of the first input event that initiated the scroll or code invocation timestamp for programmatic scroll|
| `firstFrameTime` | DOMHighResTimeStamp | Timestamp when the first visual frame reflecting the scroll was presented |
| `duration` | DOMHighResTimeStamp | Total scroll duration from `startTime` until scrolling stops. A scroll interaction is considered complete when no scroll position changes have occurred for at least 150 milliseconds, or when a scroll end event is explicitly signaled (e.g., `touchend`, `scrollend`). Includes momentum/inertia phases. |

> | `framesExpected` | unsigned long | Number of frames that would be rendered at the display's refresh rate during the scroll duration. Implementations SHOULD use the actual display refresh rate when available, and MAY fall back to 60Hz as a default. Calculated as `ceil(duration / vsync_interval)`. |

Reviewer: The explanation makes sense and thanks for the write-up. I'm not familiar with what developer expectations would be in this respect, but this certainly sounds reasonable enough to get in the explainer and receive feedback.

I'll leave this comment unresolved for now for the sake of @ogerchikov's question

- **Total distance**: `√(deltaX² + deltaY²)` — Euclidean scroll distance
- **Scroll velocity**: `totalDistance / duration * 1000` — scroll speed in pixels per second

### Entry Emission Rules

This section defines when `PerformanceScrollTiming` entries are emitted.

#### Scroll End Detection

A scroll interaction is considered **active** while the user is continuously interacting with a scroll gesture (e.g., finger on screen during touch scrolling, dragging a scrollbar thumb, holding a scroll key).

A scroll interaction is considered **complete** when:

> 1. The user is no longer actively interacting AND no scroll position changes have occurred for at least **150 milliseconds** (approximately 9 frames at 60Hz), OR

Author: moved entry granularity section up.
The direction change is discussed the the following section below "Direction Change Segmentation". 

Do you think it is sufficient or requires additional clarification?

> 1. The user is no longer actively interacting AND no scroll position changes have occurred for at least **150 milliseconds** (approximately 9 frames at 60Hz), OR

Reviewer: This organization makes sense.

2. A scroll end event is explicitly signaled (e.g., `touchend` for touch scrolling, `scrollend` event)

This timeout allows momentum/inertia scrolling to be included in the same entry as the initiating gesture.

#### Direction Change Segmentation

> A new scroll timing entry MUST be emitted when the scroll direction reverses (i.e., `deltaX` or `deltaY` changes sign during the scroll). This means a single scroll gesture can produce multiple entries if the user reverses direction mid-scroll.

Author: Good question! It's a **single entry**, but it ends when the scroll hits the boundary - the bounce-back effect isn't included.

Here's the thinking:

When you fling scroll down with momentum and hit the bottom, the entry ends right when you reach that boundary. The visual bounce that happens after (the rubber-band effect on iOS, for example) isn't captured because it's a platform UI thing that developers can't really control or optimize for.

Since the API is meant to help developers measure and improve their scroll performance, including the bounce-back would just add noise without giving them anything actionable to work with.

**So what actually gets measured:**
- Scrolling up to the boundary
- `duration` stops when you hit the boundary (doesn't include the bounce animation)
- `deltaX`/`deltaY` reflect the actual scroll distance to the boundary
- `framesExpected`/`framesProduced` only count frames during the actual scrolling

**One edge case worth mentioning:** If you're already at the boundary and try to scroll further (frustrated scrolling), you still get an entry with `deltaX`/`deltaY` = 0, which can be useful for detecting that behavior. But again, no bounce measurement.

Updated the [Edge Cases section in DESIGN_NOTES.md](DESIGN_NOTES.md#edge-cases) to clarify this.

Does this answer your question (or I misunderstood something)?

> A new scroll timing entry MUST be emitted when the scroll direction reverses (i.e., `deltaX` or `deltaY` changes sign during the scroll). This means a single scroll gesture can produce multiple entries if the user reverses direction mid-scroll.

Reviewer: Looking into it further I agree that the bounce back shouldn't fire an additional scroll event.

I am curious about the "frustrated scrolling" edge case though. I don't see where you call this out in the explainer (though I may have just missed it). If you would like this behavior included, can you add a section somewhere outlining it?

**Rationale**: Direction reversals represent distinct scroll interactions from a performance measurement perspective, as they may trigger different rendering paths and affect smoothness calculations.

#### Entry Granularity by Scroll Source

Entry emission rules vary by input type to match natural interaction boundaries:

| Scroll Source | Entry Boundary |
|--------------|----------------|
| `"touch"` | One entry per continuous gesture (`touchstart` → `touchend`), split on direction changes |

> | `"wheel"` | One entry per scroll interaction; consecutive wheel events are combined into a single entry if they occur within 150ms of each other |

Author: You're absolutely right, and thanks for catching this inconsistency!

The `duration` should reflect what the user actually experienced - which ends at the last scroll position change, not 150ms later. The 150ms timeout is purely a detection mechanism to know when to emit the entry, but shouldn't be included in the duration metric itself.

**So the behavior should be:**
- Entry starts at first scroll input event timestamp (`startTime`)
- Entry `duration` ends at the last scroll position change
- The 150ms inactivity period is just the waiting period to detect that scrolling has stopped
- Entry is emitted after waiting 150ms, but `duration` = time from start to last position change

This makes it consistent across all cases:
- Touch with `touchend`: duration = time until last position change (at or before touchend)
- Direction change: duration = time until last position change before the reversal
- Wheel/keyboard/etc: duration = time until last position change (not + 150ms)

Your framing is perfect: entry goes from "starting request to change scroll position" until "scroll in that direction comes to an end" - where "comes to an end" is detected either immediately (touchend, direction change) or retroactively after 150ms of inactivity.

I've updated the explainer to clarify this - the 150ms is for **detection**, not part of the **duration**.

- **Total distance**: `√(deltaX² + deltaY²)` — Euclidean scroll distance
- **Scroll velocity**: `totalDistance / duration * 1000` — scroll speed in pixels per second

### Understanding Frame Counts and Smoothness

**Frame counting during stationary periods:**

The `framesExpected` metric counts all frame opportunities during the scroll `duration`, including periods where scroll velocity is zero (pauses, gaps between discrete events). The `framesProduced` metric only counts frames where the scroll position actually changed.

This means:

> - **Very slow scrolls** (less than ~1 pixel per frame) will show lower smoothness scores even if rendering is perfect

Reviewer: To align with the recommendation for browsers to count subpixel changes in their `framesProduced`, what about tweaking this to say that very slow scrolls could cause a drop in smoothness, but ideally still won't?

Maybe something as small as:
```suggestion
- **Very slow scrolls** (less than ~1 pixel per frame) MAY show lower smoothness scores even if rendering is perfect, depending on browser implementation
```

| `"keyboard"` | One entry per key repeat sequence (from `keydown` until key release + 150ms inactivity) |
| `"programmatic"` | One entry per scroll interaction; consecutive programmatic scroll calls (e.g., `scrollTo()`, `scrollBy()`) on the same scrollable element are combined into a single entry if they occur within 150ms of each other |
| `"other"` | One entry per scroll interaction, ending after 150ms of inactivity |

#### Scroll End Detection

A scroll interaction is considered **active** while the user is continuously interacting with a scroll gesture. What constitutes "active interaction" depends on the input type (see table above):
- **Touch**: Finger is touching and moving on the screen
- **Wheel**: Mouse wheel events are being received
- **Keyboard**: Scroll key is held down
- **Other**: Scrollbar is being dragged, or other input method is engaged

A scroll interaction is considered **complete** when:
1. The user is no longer actively interacting AND no scroll position changes have occurred for at least **150 milliseconds** (approximately 9 frames at 60Hz), OR

> 2. A scroll end event is explicitly signaled (e.g., `touchend` for touch scrolling, `scrollend` event)

Reviewer: I made a play space to look at the `scroll` and `scrollend` existing behaviors:
https://codepen.io/mhochk/pen/LEZmBgr

Toying around, it looks like `scrollend` almost matches all of your desired end times already:
- It does combine multiple keystrokes that happen quickly in succession, firing `scrollend` only once (though likely it's not a 150ms gap, but a requires the scroll not be "complete")
- It fires after the bounce of an overscroll
- It fires upon releasing the scrollbar, a finger being used for scrolling, or center-clicking to exit auto-scroll mode.
- *It isn't firing at all if I excessively hold down the page up/down key and then release. This feels like a bug, so I'm looking into filing one.

Would it be reasonable to simplify the definition of an entry period to work off the existing `scrollend` definition/behavior? Something akin to:

```
A scroll entry starts when a request is made to change the scroll position.
A scroll entry ends when:
- A scroll end event is explicitly signaled (i.e. the `scrollend` event is fired) OR
- The scroll direction changes OR
- Retroactively if the scroll position does not change for at least **150 milliseconds** (approximately 9 frames at 60Hz)
```

Reviewer: FWIW on the bug I mentioned (in case you play around and encounter it as well):

Normal behavior:
* Hold down page down until it starts to auto repeat
* Release before reaching the end of the scroll region
* `scrollend` correctly fires

Bug Repro:
* Hold down page down until it starts to auto repeat
* Wait until you have scrolled the entire scroll region down
* Release the key
* `scrollend` does *not* fire

I've confirmed this doesn't repro in Firefox or Safari, so will get a proper bug filed to track this.
